15. ??????? ??????????? - ???? ????????  (Pearls of wisdom 
or moral sayings)
1. Gunavanthulalo pradhamaganyudu gaani kodukunu ganna
Meaning:    A woman can be considered as a barren woman, if her son is not good and honest, and a man of good character. A good son, if he is a man of integrity and honour, it matters very little if he is an only son. It is useless to have a hundred foolish sons. How can a basketful of pebbles be compared in worth, to one precious gem? 
Moral: It is worth having a single son, if he is good and honorable rather than having a hundred worthless sons.
2. Biddalaku vidhyaabyaasamu cheyiepami thallidhandrula
Meaning:-   A sleeping lion cannot hope to get its food. Animals cannot, and will not walk into its mouth. No man can earn or achieve without effort. A child cannot straight away become a scholar, right at birth. The parents have to educate the child with care. Imparting education to a growing child is the prime duty of the parents. They fail in their duty if they do not do so. 
Moral: Nothing can be achieved without effort
3. Eerdhaaluvu, jugupsaavanthudu, nissanthoshi, krodhanudu
Meaning:   A man full of jealous, a man who is unkempt in appearance, always miserable, ill-tempered, forever doubting everything and always dependent on others for his needs, are the six types of unpleasant men can never find happiness.
Moral: An immoral man who has no control over himself can never be happy.
4. Evvadu bhudhimanthudo vaadu vrudhudu gaani
Meaning:  Growing in years does not always mean that a man is mature in thought. Only a wise man, is mature in his thought and behavior. It is not with age but with wisdom that a man’s maturity can be determined. 
Moral: Only a wise man is a mature in his thinking. 
5. Thannumaalina dharmamu, medaluchedda bheramu
Meaning: If a man  neglects to  help himself, it is foolish to presume, that he can help others.
Presume = take for granted
Moral: If one cannot take care of  himself he cannot help others. 

6. Arthapariheenunaku nirantaramu khedamu ambavinchunu
Meaning:   A poor man is a worried man. His worry causes him anxiety and he cannot really think clearly. As he is unable to plan properly, whatever he undertakes ends in failure. All his attempts fail, like water  in a river drying up in summer. This verse makes it clear, that only a man, who has wealth is able to win the respect of all.
Moral: Wealth is vital to live in this world.

7. Samsaara vishavrukhamunaku renduphalamulamruta
Meaning: Mundane existence in this world is like a tree of poison. Strangely it puts forth two wonderful fruits as , sweet as nectar. One is the ability to read and enjoy beautiful poetry, and the other is the opportunity to have the company of good and great men. Both give immense happiness to any human being. 
Mundane existence = worldly, earthly 
Puts forth = puts forward ; Nectar = sweet to taste
Immense = vast,  unlimited
Moral: Learn to enjoy beautiful poetry and the company of great men. 
8. purushudevvadu
Meaning:  Any task can be completed successfully if it is done sincerely, giving great thought to how best to do it. Just knowing the name of a medicine does not cure a sick man. A blind man cannot see, even if he holds a lamp in his hands. Similarly a man may have a good knowledge of theory. It is useless if he does not know how to apply it and put it to use. 
Moral: One should know how to make the best use of knowledge.
9. Sevaavruthiche vachu paayasamukante swachandavruthiche
Meaning:   A man may earn rich delicacies to eat, by serving a master. Humble food earned with independent effort can taste much better and is to be preferred. 
Moral: Standing on one’s own feet is always a better choice. 

10. Udhyogiki dhurabhumiyu, vidvaamsunaku
Meaning:  A Man pursuing his duties as an employee does not mind the distance to place he has to work in, be it near, or be it far. A learned and a skilled man is happy wherever his expertise is admired and honoured, anywhere in the world. A person, who has love in his heart and speech, has no enemy anywhere. Nothing is impossible to an intelligent man. 
Moral:  All should learn and acquire sharp skills in grasping, thinking and reasoning, that is, the skills of the intellect, and achieve all that they set out to do.
11. Bahudheshaatanambhunu, bahusruthula thoda
Meaning:  A man who has travelled widely and has spent much time in the company of highly educated and skilled men of fame, one who has read all the texts, scriptures and literature, or one who has served for a long time in the courts of kings, is bound to emerge as  very wise and shrewd man, no matter who he is or how he has been in his early life. 
Shrewd =  sharp, intelligent
Moral: Conversation with a profound scholar is equal to  reading a thousand books. 

12. Kuttina dhelandru, kuttakunna gummarapuruvandru gaadhe?

Meaning:  A scorpion and a beetle look alike. The one that stings is known as a scorpion and the one that does not is known as a beetle. Similarly a man who courageously solves his problems is known as an achiever and a successful man, and the one who is unable to face and solve his problems is known as a failure in life. 
Moral: Only if a creature hisses, it can be recognized as a snake.  



13. Shareera maadhyam khulu dharmasaadhanammani 
Meaning:  This human body has been given to man to serve the cause of the right and the just.  When a man serves his master faithfully and were to lose his life in this service, he is sure to go straight to heaven. Thus a man who has sacrificed his life for the sake of duty, is a man who has died for what is right. Such a man is loved and honoured by all. 
Moral: Any man, who sacrifices his life while serving his master, is remembered forever as a hero. 
14. Arthambu sakalapurushaardha saadhanambu dhanamunaku
Meaning:  Wealth helps win everything in life.  Nothing remains impossible, when one has wealth. He may have nothing else, of not like noble birth, caste, education, beauty or character, but still he is honoured by all because of his riches. Poverty remains the root cause of all misery, and wealth remains the cause of removing all misery. 
Moral: There is nothing in life that wealth cannot achieve.  

15. Sagganulathodi sakhithvambu sambaasana
Meaning:  Just by speaking to good people, it is possible to strike a friendship. They extend their hand of friendship to all who seek it, with a warm heart. 
Moral: Very little effort is needed to win the bond of friendship with a man of good character. 
16. Moguluneeru nammi, cheruvuneeru paara
Meaning:  No one should let the water out of the lake to his fields, presuming that the overcast sky will rain and fill the tank.
Moral: Never act on presumption.
17. Sprushinchune dhvipambunu, naagrhuninchuchune
Meaning:  Evil men scheme and destroy those who oppose them. An elephant can use its trunk to strike. The snake can use its sense of smell and strike. A king may appear to be a benevolent ruler but remove those who oppose him ruthlessly and a sadist can torture someone with a smile on his face. Wisdom lies in keeping a distance from them. 
Moral: There are people who can destroy without appearing to do so. 
18. Pandinavrukshyambu chandambhuna sagganundu
Meaning:  A good and an honourable man is humble and gentle like a tree bent with the weight of its fruit. A foolish proud man stands erect like a dried stick. He cannot withstand a blow, and breaks easily as any dry stick would. 

Moral: Humility is the quality of a true gentleman, while pride is the quality of a scoundrel.
Humility = modesty ; Scoundrel = A man who has no good qualities
19. Chelimimi chedhu mepimpavachhum gaani, balimi meyien paalu
Meaning:  A person may be persuaded to eat something which is bitter to taste, if it is given in a loving, caring manner; but it is impossible to make someone drink even milk, by force. 
Moral: A friendly and warm approach can persuade a person to do whatever is desired. 
20. Vaapeekupambulunu, thatakambulunu
Meaning:  Whether they are wells, ponds or the hollows of trees, only the first occupants have the right of ownership over them but only temporarily. They cannot ever keep them permanently. When the present owners move away others occupy them. 
Moral: Ownership over anything can be only temporary. 
21. Swaasrithaavana samo nahi dharma mani vedhamulu
Meaning:  A person is honour bound to offer protection to anyone who seeks his help. There can be no greater act of virtue than this. The Vedas have laid down this tenet. 

Moral: It is the duty of a person of honour to give protection to anyone who asks for it.
22. Dhehamulu bhudbuprathimambulu:
Meaning:  Human lives are like air bubbles which are bound to burst at any moment. Youth is like the foam on the surface of water. It can vanish easily. Wealth is like the momentary flash of lightning in the clouds. All pomp and show can fade away like pictures on a wall. A dead man’s wife and children follow him only up to the grave. Only the good that a man has done during his lifetime remains with him after death. All should remember that a noble life lived leaves its imprint on time forever.
Vanish= disappear
Moral: Only the memory of one’s righteous acts remains after one is dead.

23. Sadaarandhraanveshaname panigaa kutilagathini varthinchu
Meaning:  Snakes are forever in search of holes, writhing and wriggling all the time. Similarly an evil men are forever trying to harm others and think in a crooked manner they cannot be  kind to anyone and always try to harm others.

Moral: Evil people always find fault with others and try to harm them.

24. Bagguna mandudavaanalambu vrukshaagrambulam 
Meaning:-  A Sudden burst of flames burns only the edges of the trees but does not destroy the whole tree, while a sudden flood of water can uproot the entire tree. In other words, what cannot be done with the use of force can be done easily with cool, persuasive words. Here the fire is likened to force and the flood water to the use of quiet convincing words.
Moral: what cannot be achieved with force can be successfully done with kind persuasive words.

Persuade (verb) = convince, get someone to agree;  persuasive (adjective)
25. Shikhi shikhaatapthambagujalambe pongipadi
Meaning:  Fire heats up and makes water boil. The same water which boils and overflows the vessel can put out the fire. This is a universal truth. Similarly if one tries to harm another, the one who is hurt can turn around and destroy the one who has harmed him.
Moral: A man who has been hurt can react by destroying his tormentor.
Torment (verb) = cause pain;  tormentor (noun) 
-------*******------




