2. ???? ??????
15. Navvakumee sabalopala
Meaning:  One should never be seen laughing in the presence of a formal gathering, parents or higher authorities. Neither should one be seen laughing in the company of a woman. One should be careful not to make fun of scholars. Laughing at the wrong time or at a wrong place, can be misunderstood as an insult to those present. Such behavior is not acceptable in a cultured society. 
Moral: Do not invite trouble by laughing at wrong moments. They give rise to misunderstandings.

16. paranaarisodarudie
Meaning:  A truly virtuous man is one who treats all women other than his wife, as sisters. He never covets others’ possessions. He helps everyone, never elates to flattery and does not react to others’ anger towards him.
Elate= ????????? ;   flattery=??????
Moral: A truly virtuous man is one who lives and works for others’ welfare. “Helping others is a virtue. Harming others is a sin” This is a very true statement.

17. Maataku braanamu sathyamu
Meaning:- Truth in the spoken word, loyal soldiers to defend the fort, virtue in a woman and the acknowledgement of the written word are vital.
Moral: Standing by one’s word, having brave soldiers to defend a fort, self-respect to woman and the acknowledgement found in a letter are vital, like the life-force. 
18. laavu galavaanikantenu
Meaning:  Brain is always superior to  brawn. The elephant despite its huge size remains obedient to the mahout who rides on it and controls it. 

Brawn = muscle, strength
Moral: An intelligent man is always stronger than a man of muscle. 
19. vinadagu nevvaru cheppina
Meaning: It is wise to listen carefully to others. Without  haste, one should think about what he has heard and gather enough information.  After a deep and careful examination of all the facts he should arrive at a conclusion that is fair and impartial. A man who does this is a man of truth and integrity.
Integrity = honesty
Moral: A man of honour is one who gives a patient hearing, examines fairly and justly and then arrives at a conclusion.
20. theyanipadharthamokadivae
Meaning:  This verse is about the duties of a host towards his  guest. A guest should be honoured as if he is divine. A sweetmeat in hand should never be eaten alone. It should be served to others first. The rules of a perfect host should be observed carefully even if an enemy were to be the guest. This is the culture of this country. Such behavior makes love and brotherhood grow in society spreading joy and happiness all around.
Sweetmeat = ??????
Moral:  A guest is to be treated as a divine visitor.
21. veladhi, joodambu, paanambu, vet’a
Meaning:- Womanizing, gambling, drinking, hunting, harsh speech, cruelty in punishment and spending extravagantly are regarded as the seven vices. One should keep away from them. 
Moral: A good human being should guard against all these vices.  
22. tagina veshhambu danu daana
Meaning:  A virtuous man should be suitably dressed and  not indulge in self-praise. If someone insults him, he does not react angrily. He never regrets his generosity to someone. Even when he is in dire trouble, he does not stray from the path of right conduct. He has all the qualities of a man of honour. 
Moral: The test of true virtue is never to stray from the right path, no matter whatever troubles or dangers one has to face. 
Stray = deviate from the right way, wander away.
23.  tanuvunu virigina yalugula
Meaning:  It is easy to remove the arrows that have pierced the body. It is impossible to remove the hurt of the harsh words that have pierced the heart. 
Unsaid = without saying.
Moral: It is always wise to leave bitter words that hurt others, unsaid. Feelings that  are hurt, never heal.
24.Lanchamichhi, adhikalaaba mondhedu vaadu
Meaning:  The one, who offers a bribe for gain, is a greater offender than the one who accepts a bribe. If there is no one to offer a bribe, corruption cannot exist at all. Good advice needs to be heeded. 
Heed= take notice
Moral: The one who offers bribe is the first offender, and the one who accepts the bribe is the second offender.
25. kruuramiena leemi koralalo
Meaning:  Dire poverty drives children at a tender age to become labourers carrying heavy stones to make a living. This sight breaks the heart of even the hardest rocks. It is unfortunate that the future citizens of India are deprived of education and are caught in such a heart-rending situation. There is no future for this country if this evil is not eradicated. 
Eradicate = wipe out, erase
Moral: Child labour should be eradicated.
26. vidhyaa baalyamandhu vishayasukambulu
 Meaning:  The sages of ancient times have laid down that children should acquire education early, discharge their duties as householders in youth and accept a philosophical attitude to life in their old age. Finally they should seek refuge in a peaceful death after living a life of renunciation. 
 Refuge = shelter ; renunciation= ?????????
Moral: A man has to live as per the principles and guidelines given by the sages, suitable for every phase of life from birth to death. 
27. kanna tallidandri kalahinchi
Meaning:- In modern times, society is moving towards radical changes. Differences between parents are driving them towards divorce and separation. The children are torn emotionally, denied parental love and security, and they grow up with burning hate and bitterness in their hearts. They become antisocial and offenders against law. If this trend is not checked the future of society is in danger. 
Moral: A broken home destroys the future of the children.
28. kotllu dhanmundiyunu, marikonni kotllu
Meaning:  There are two kinds of thieves. One is the kind who is very wealthy and still tries to secure more wealth through the back door. The other kind is the one who resorts to stealing food to satisfy his hunger. It has to be judged who between the two is the worse offender and deserves to be punished. 
Resort= doing
Moral: It is natural to want to satisfy hunger. Yet  it is an offence to steal even for that reason. But to steal through the backdoor to become richer and richer is nothing but greed and it is a greater offence.

