10.???????????
78. Thumachettu mundlu thodaneputtunu
Meaning: The thorny bush, Acacia Arabica, has thorns right from the time it sprouts from the seed. A foolish man’s stupidity is born with him at birth. 
Moral:  Foolishness is a trait that is present in a fool right from the time of his birth.
Trait = ??????, ??????
79.   paamukanna ledu papistti yagu geevi
Meaning: The snake is a horrible creature. It can bite and kill humans. Even such a dreadful creature can be made to dance to the tune of the snake charmer. The fool on the other hand cannot be made to understand and accept anything, however much one may try. 
Moral: A fool is often worse than the snake.
80. pottlakaaya raayi posagu thratanu gattapp
Meaning:  The snake gourd can be made to grow straight if a stone is hung on its end. Trying to straighten the tail of a dog is an impossible task. Similarly it is impossible to change the mind of a fool.  
Moral: It is impossible to convince a fool.

81. pandithulinavaaru diguvam
Meaning:- A monkey may swing  high at the edge of a branch. Lions and elephants may wander below the tree. But that does not in any way help to boost up the worth of the monkey. Similarly if  in a scholars’ assembly, a fool were to force himself in, and occupies a prominent place, the worth of the scholars is in no way diminished. The foolish man stands out as a misfit among the scholars. 
Moral: The worth of an individual is assessed on his character and ability, and not on the position he occupies. 
82 Teliyani manujuni sukhamuga
Meaning:  It is possible to explain  and convince a man who is ignorant. It is also easy to explain to a knowledgeable man. But it is impossible to explain and convince a man with half baked knowledge.
Moral: It is impossible to explain to a man who has half-baked knowledge.
83. Telivi yekinta
Meaning:  The poet says “when I knew little, I wandered like a mad elephant, in utter vanity, that I knew everything. When I came upon scholars who were far more learned than I was, my arrogance disappeared. I realized how little I knew”.  A man, who believes he knows all, is an ignorant man. One who believes he knows too little is a truly learned man. 
Moral: No man should presume that he knows everything there is to know in this world.
Presume = take for granted
84. elugutholu techi yenninaalludikina
Meaning:  The fur of a bear is black in colour. No amount of washing can make it white. A wooden doll remains mute however much it is beaten. In the same manner no one can make a fool understand, or learn, anything. 
Moral: No amount of polishing can make brass, gold.

85. oogunoogu mechu onaranga agnaani
Meaning: An evil man admires another evil man. A noble man admires another noble man. An evil man has no word of praise for a good man. An ignorant man is full of praise for a selfish man. A pig loves mud and slush and revels in it. It does not enjoy perfume. Hence good people praise good people and evil ones praise bad people 
Revel = enjoy
Moral: A man has admiration only for another like him.  
86. mrugamu mrugamanuchunu mrugamunu doosshhintru
Meaning:  An epithet ‘beast’ is used as a word of abuse. A  stupid  man is worse than a beast. A beast is cruel and kills only when it is hungry. A foolish  man harasses and troubles everyone at all times. A beast is certainly preferable to a foolish man. 
Epithet = a word describing a quality; Abuse =   insulting language
Moral: A fool can be more dangerous than a beast.
87. heenudenni vidya lila nabyasinchina
Meaning:  An unworthy man remains unworthy, despite having acquire skill in a number of arts. A donkey may have carried on its back, loads of sandalwood any number of times, yet it remains insensitive to the fragrance of sandalwood. A donkey remains a donkey forever.
Moral: A fool remains a fool in spite of all that he is taught. 
88. vidyalenivaadu vidvaamsu cheruva
Meaning: A person who is not educated can never become a scholar even if he is in the company of scholars. A crane can never be a swan even if it haunts the same lake with a number of swans.
Crane =????; Haunt  = ????????
Moral: An uneducated man remains the same even if he is among scholars.









