14. ?????? ?????? (The path of philosophy)
191. iemi konuchi vachu, nemi thagonipovu
Meaning:  A man brings nothing with him when he is born. He takes nothing with him when he dies. No one knows where he goes from here or where his wealth finally goes.
   Moral: None brings anything when born nor takes anything while dying. 
192. kanaga, sommu lenno kanakambadhokkate
Meaning:  Gold remains the same, whatever jewellery is made from it. Cows may be of many colours, black, white, brown or mixed but the colour of milk is the same. Similarly a variety of flowers are gathered for worship, but no matter whatever flowers are used, worship remains the same. This unity in diversity should be clearly understood.
Unity = of one; Diversity = of many, varied
Moral: There is unity in diversity.
193. chithashudhi galigi chesina punyambu
Meaning:  Even a small action done with a pure heart, is equal to a very important action. The seed of the banyan may be very small, but in it is dormant, a huge banyan tree of the future. 
Moral: However minor an action, if done with a pure and a sincere heart, will give huge rewards.
194. bhumi naadi yanina bhumi phakkuna navvu
Meaning:  When a man dies he is buried in the earth. He becomes one with it. When man says “This land is mine” will the earth not be amused at his foolishness? Wealth never stays steady at a single place for too long. Today it is with one man and tomorrow with another. Thus when a man says “This wealth is mine” it is very amusing as he has to leave it one day ironically too. A soldier afraid to die in battle deserts the army in the midst of fighting and perhaps dies later. The lord of Death is certainly amused at a man trying to flee from certain death. This shows there is nothing in this world that really belongs to man. 
Desert (verb) = ????????????????????,  Desert(noun) =?????
Moral: Nothing belongs to a man on this earth. He is only a traveler, who comes stays for a while, and leaves after a short sojourn.  
Sojourn = temporary stay at a place 
195. kalisi aarjinchukondamu
Meaning:  All men should work and earn together. All should live in harmony with no ill-will towards one another.  United, they can achieve great things.  All should protect themselves from injustice. This is the wisdom of the Isavasya Upanishad.
Moral: All should live together and protect one another.

196. pongipovadu shukhamulupondhinappudu
Meaning:  One who is never overjoyed with the good things in life, never loses heart, when troubles overwhelm him. Fear, attachment and anger are discarded, by him. Such a one is called a truly steady man. This is a precept of the Bhagavat Gita. 
Moral: Joy and sorrow should never destabilize a steady, enlightened man. 
197. punugu pillikela puttinche vaasanal
Meaning:  The Lord Brahma has created the small civet cat with its fragrance. Gold which is desired by one and all, to wear as ornaments, has no fragrance. No one can delve deep and understand the acts of the Creator Brahma.
Delve = dig
Moral: It is impossible to understand the mysteries of creation. 
198. bhumi peeru valla, punya kshethramu laaye
Meaning:  Holy places of pilgrimage are flourishing because of the sanctity and the power of the place, because of the sacred idols of the deities, and the sacred waters of the rivers. 
Sacred = holy
Moral: Holy places arose because of the place; sculpted idols of divinities have come from the stones and centres   of pilgrimages have arisen along the banks of the rivers. The reason why all these have gained importance has to be understood. 
199. niyata thapamunu nindriya nigrahambu
Meaning:  Performing penance with great devotion, acquiring perfect control over the senses, and deep learning are all for the peace of mud. Above all it is overcoming selfishness that is a must to have peace. Hence those who desire peace must overcome selfishness and engage themselves in selfless service.
Moral: If selfishness is overcome, one can enjoy peace of mind. 
200. evari kantabadaka, yellarachedhiva
Meaning: Never seen by anyone, but worshipped by all, the Lord remains the ultimate wonder. 
Moral: God is an enigma and cannot be understood by man.
Enigma= ?????????





