1.Dharmapadhathi
1. Urvivaarikella Nokka kanchamubetti
Meaning:-  All humanity is one. It has been known as ‘vasudhaika kutumbam’, which means that all human beings on earth belong to one great family. Men often divide themselves on grounds of race, religion, language or caste and quarrel among themselves. This bodes no good to the human race.  Hence the poet suggests that entire mankind should gather at one place, eat and make merry together. They have to spread the message that all should remain united and live together happily.
Bodes = foretell
Moral: All mankind should live in brotherhood. All men should live together as one. 

2. Kopamunanu ghanatha koncemiepovunu
Meaning:- Anger makes man less worthy. Anger causes a person to lose his peace of mind. When one learns to keep his temper under control, he can certainly succeed in his aspirations. Hence temper should always be kept under firm control. 

Aspiration = Desire, goal
Moral: Anger is like a flame, which can cause total destruction. If one can win over anger he is on the road to sure success.
3. Champadaginayatti shathruvu thanacheetha
Meaning:- If a bitter enemy is captured, do not harm or take revenge on him. It is sensible to help him and set him free. It will result in the enmity within him to fade away. He can become a grateful well wisher and friend. That is bound to fill the heart with peace. Do not kill a man, kill the enmity in his heart.
Moral: Enmity has to be won over with charity and generosity. Forgiveness and generosity are certain  to win an enemy over.
4. chaaki, koka luthiki cheekaaku padajeasi
Meaning:- The washer-man washes clothes on the washing stone, beats them hard, cleans them and neatly folds them before handing them over to us. Similarly a true student should realize, that when his teacher is sometimes forced to be harsh to him, he is guiding him on the right path. A teacher’s punishment is meant only as a measure to discipline and steer him to a better life.
Steer = guide
Moral: Firm discipline is a forms a part of education.
5. chethulaku dhodavu dhaanamu
Meaning: Rich, golden bracelets do not add beauty to hands. Charity does. Truth and justice add glory to a king. An ethical and a moral life enhance one’s life and makes it better. Chastity and honour are precious to a woman. Virtues are far more beautiful ornaments than ornaments of gold. 
Enhance = increase;  Chastity = Purity
Moral: Inner beauty is true beauty.
6. thanakopame thana shathruvu
Meaning:- Anger has always proved to be one’s own enemy. A man of pleasant temperament has no enemies. His calm demeanour protects him. His tolerance and kindness to others remain as his best well-wishers. When he is happy, it is his heaven and his hell when he is sad. 
Demeanour = manner of conducting one self
Moral: Joy of heaven, or pain of hell, is all a matter of the state of mind. 
7. Naduvaku mee theru vokkata
Meaning:- Never travel alone. Do not accept food in an enemy’s house, showering praise and compliments. Do not covet another’s wealth. Never hurt the feelings of others with harsh words. 
Covet = long to possess
Moral : A truly cultured man never hurts the feelings of others.
8. purushudevvadu kriyavanthudo vaadu
Meaning: When wrongs are done, all that is right and good is harmed. Truth is always harmed by all that is false. If there is  no protest made when wrongs are committed, they certainly destroy all the people who have remained silent. God protects all that is right and true, to give prosperity and happiness to all. 
Moral: If truth and justice are protected, they will in turn protect all.
9. Oru laeyavi yonarinchina
Meaning:  If an action causes pain and suffering to one, he should take care that he does not cause the same pain and suffering to others. This remains the essence of all that is taught by all holy faiths all over the world. 
Moral:  Pain and suffering are the same to all. Before one hurts another, this should be remebred by everyone.
10. Jeevith lakshayaanni gurchi chettemani antundhi
Meaning:  A tree shows the way as to how people should shape their attitudes. It seeks no reward from anyone in return. It cannot walk, yet it shows the path of right conduct. It showers benefits without holding out promises. It braves the rain and sun while giving shade to others. It never bows low before the rich and powerful. It does not shun the meek and the poor. Monkeys may shake its branches and naughty boys may throw stones at it; but the tree in return gives them its fruit. Lord Buddha received his enlightenment under a tree. 
Shun = reject
Moral: Man can learn a great deal from the example a tree sets.
11. darma varthanaleni vidhyaarjanammu
Meaning:- Acquiring education  without right conduct, pursuing science without human values, earning easy money without working hard for it, earning from business without ethics, engaging in social work for selfish reasons, seeking pleasure against the dictates of conscience, participating in public life and politics without morality and justice, all remain as the seven unpardonable sins against society. 
Moral :  All efforts should be made to wipe out the faults within one self, before undertaking work to serve society.
12. aligina nalugaka yoggulu
Meaning: One should remain calm when someone goes against him. He should turn a deaf ear to the abuses hurled at him. He should not react if he is insulted. Such a man is a true, just and  wise.
Hurl = throw
Moral: A true and a just man should have a great deal of patience. 
13. musali  tallidandri mogamina chudaka
Meaning:  Parents should be taken care of in their old age by their sons. They should never be  left alone and unloved, or feel abandoned. The son should realize that one day he too will be old and infirm and his children may abandon him too. 
Abandon = desert, fosake responsibility; Infirm = weak.
Moral: It is the duty of children to take care of old parents and give them love.
14. Nurunigeetameeda naduchunu
Meaning:  A train runs on the rail laid by man. Society moves on the guidelines laid down by the wise sages of the past. If these guidelines are not observed great harm and destruction can be caused. Hence all men have to choose the righteous path in life to bring joy and happiness to all. 
Righteous = upright, honest, virtuous.
Moral: The future of all mankind depends on the path of truth and justice. 

