11.  ?????? ?????? 
89. antaramgamandu naparaadhamulu sesi
Meaning:  A man who sits in his mind and pretends to be a good man in the eyes of  the world is, by nature a bad man. Even if others remain unaware of his evil thoughts God is bound to know about them.
Moral: Never sin even in thought. Others may not know but God will.

90. alpabuddhivaani kadhikaaramichina
Meaning: Dogs love to chew leather footwear. It can never relish the sweetness of sugar cane. Similarly if an evil man attains a position of power, he can never appreciate the worthy advice of good, noble people and gets rid of them. 
Attain = get
Moral: Never hand over power to an evil man. 
91. alpudepudu ballku naadambaramugaanu
Meaning:  A man with a weak character is vain. His words are loud and pompous as he is always boasting. A worthy man speaks gentle words sober and dignified. The former’s words ring loud like bronze while the latter’s words ring low, like gold. 
Moral: Vanity is a bad quality in anyone. 
Vanity= empty pride
92. kaanivaanitodagalasi melangina

Meaning:  If a swan seeks the company of a raven, it is bound to get into trouble. In the same way, the company of a bad man is bound to land a good man in trouble.
Moral: Evil Company is always harmful.
93. gangapaaruchundu kadalani gatitoda
Meaning: The waters in the river Ganga flow calm and quiet. The water looks almost still and tranquil. A small dirty stream rumbles hastily and noisily, splashing its murky waters. A good and a worthy man is calm, quiet and patient like the river Ganga while a worthless man is like the dirty stream, loud, boastful and impatient. 
Tranquil =   Peaceful, undisturbed
Moral: A pot that is full does not splash as it remains steady. 
94. veiru purugucheiri vrukshambu jerachunu
Meaning:  The pests that attack the roots of a tree destroy it. Pests can destroy an entire field. Similarly, one bad man’s company corrupts even good men who move with him. 
Moral: A donkey that brays spoils a donkey that is grazing. 
Bray=cry of donkey

95. alpudenni pallulalayaka palkina
Meaning:- A man of low character can shower abuse on a worthy man. Still a worthy man remains undisturbed and does not react. A crow’s dropping on a tree does not bother the tree at all.
Moral: The elephant remains calm and undisturbed when dogs bark. Strong, worthy men remains calm when lesser mortals throw abuse at them.
Lesser mortals=???????
96. talanundu vishhamu phanikini
Meaning:  Snakes have poison in their fangs, scorpions have poison in their tails, but an evil man has poison all over his body.
Moral: An evil man is like the poisonous plant which causes a rash wherever it touches the body. 
97. balavantuda naakeimani
Meaning: A man should  never be over confident, believing he can behave as he pleases, just because he has strength. He should remember that a swarm of ants can kill a huge serpent. 
Swarm=?????
Moral: No one should make too many enemies as united they may prove too strong for him.
98. lookamuloona durjanula lootu
Meaning:  A good  man should never get familiar with strangers without knowing enough about them. They can ridicule him and make fun of him if they are evil men. Crows gather together to drive away the cuckoo, with their maddening cawing. 
Ridicule=    ??????, ???????
Moral: Keep evil people at a safe distance.
99. sthiratara dhrmavartana
Meaning:  A noble man with character earns name and fame. Even if an evil man were to hurl abuses at him, still his greatness will in no way be less. An ocean of milk does not become impure because of a single crow’s dropping. It remains pure, with its billowing waves and remains the same mighty ocean. 
Hurl = throw  ; Billows = rising waves
Moral: Never give importance to the words of a bad man. 
100. balavantudu pi netina
Meaning:  A weak man  opposed  by a mighty man, a man who has lost all his wealth, a thief who waits to break into a house and a man blinded by passion can never hope to sleep peacefully, as they are always afraid of what may happen, and suffer deep anxiety. 
Moral: Evil minded people can never enjoy sound sleep.

101. dhanamunu vidyayu vamsham
Meaning: Wealth, scholarship and birth in a noble family make evil men proud and arrogant, while good men with the same advantages learn to be humble and have no arrogance at all.
Moral: A snake drinks milk and spits out poison. A dog drinks milk and learns to be loyal and true to its master.

102. aakaashambunanundi shambhuni
Meaning:  Bhagiratha performed severe penance and brought the Ganga from the sky to the earth. The holy river first descended to the locks of Lord Siva and then on to the Himalayas. From the Himalayan peaks the river flows down to the plains. Finally it joins the sea and moves on into the netherworld, Patala. Similarly, a man who has attained the highest peak of success loses it and  slides down,  descending till he finally disappears into oblivion. 
Oblivion = state of being forgotten.
Moral: No one can predict where a stone rolling down the mountain side will come to a stop. 

103. sandu dorikeneini
Meaning:  A man can never be a true leader of the people if he quietly embezzles public funds. A fence which grazes on a field, it is supposed to protect, can never work for its welfare, of the field of corn.
Embezzle = steal  
Moral: A true leader works for the welfare of the  people.   
104. Swaarthamokate yolu sarwa jagathhunu
Meaning: It is selfishness that makes the world go round. Differences on caste, religion and language all remain only weak excuses, to be used on and off. If selfishness can be conquered and erased, caste, religion or language will never come in the way of world peace.
Erase = remove
Moral: Erasing selfishness ensures peace.
105. adhamudiena manujudarthavanthudiena
Meaning:  An evil man, if he is rich, his word is writ everywhere. Even shells, have great value in a king’s court. That is the way of the world.
Moral: There is great power in wealth knowing this, one has to conduct himself accordingly.

106. entha chadhuvu chadhivi yennni nearchinagaani
Meaning:  No amount of education can change an evil man to become good and noble. Cleaning coal with milk is of no use as it will remain black. 
Moral: An evil man cannot change for the better however much we may try.



107. neethilenivaani nidhinthru lokulu
Meaning:  Whatever the qualities a man may have  if he has no morals and ethics, the world is bound to criticize him. Thus a man should take the path of right conduct with determination, to win respect in society.
Moral: The best of all paths is that of the right and true.
108. konchepunarusangathiche
Meaning:  One bed bug alone can drive people to wash their cots with hot water. The beds are thoroughly beaten and shaken with sticks. If one evil man has a part to play in any good project, it is bound to fail.
Moral: One spark is enough to set fire to and destroy a house.
109. eppudu dappulu vedhakedu
Meaning:  Working with a man who is forever finding fault with one’s service, is like a frog living in the shade of a cobras’ hood. The snake is sure to find an excuse any movement to swallow the frog. One should never work under such a man. 
Moral: Never play a cat and mouse game.
110. dhaggara kodemu cheppedu
Meaning:- A king should never believe his minister who carries tales about his subjects to harm them. Such attitudes are like cutting down the sacred “Kalpataru” or the wishing tree to get coal.
Moral: Never allow a tale bearing mischievous person to come near and cause trouble.
111. eddemanushyude merugu
Meaning:  A stupid person can never imbibe great qualities, however long he lives, with a man who has great qualities. Only an intelligent man can benefit and learn from a great man. A wooden ladle will never know the taste of a dish, no matter however many times it is used to stir it. It is only the tongue which can know the taste.
Imbibe = absorb , ????????
Moral:  A stupid man can never learn good things from great people, however long he may have been in their company.
112. athi gunaheena lobhiki,
Meaning: A hopeless miser can never enjoy a good meal, however much wealth he has. He believes that his body and wealth are going to remain with him forever. His life is so miserable, that his life is like that of a dog, which can only lap and drink water, even if there is a flood around him.
Moral: Even if a stream swells in flood, the fate of a dog is such, that it can only lap the water with its tongue.

113. balamu galavaani baluvuru balaheenu
Meaning: This Stanza is about the strength of unity. A strong man can be overcome and be defeated when many far weaker opponents stand together united to fight. Small bees can kill a man who tries to take away honey from their honeycomb, by stinging him to death.
 
Moral: There is great strength in unity.
114. uuraka sagganun dhodigi
Meaning:  Moths eat away precious silks, though carefully stored in a box. Similarly an evil man often harms a good man, for no valid reason at all. 
Moral: An evil man often harms others though he has no reason to do so. 
115. tiviri esumuna dhielambu
Meaning:  It is possible to squeeze oil from sand, drink water from a mirage, or  search far and wide and bring a rabbits’ horn, but it is impossible to please a stupid man. 
Moral: Anything is possible except satisfying a foolish man.
116. kopamu nubbunu garwamu
Meaning: The qualities of an unpleasant, man of low character   are, to lose his temper often, be wildly happy for minor things, be very proud,  be dissatisfied all the time,be vain and arrogant and drifts around doing nothing of importance.
Moral:  An evil man’s bad qualities are like the thorns of a babul tree. 

