12. ????????? ?????? (The common way of the world) 
117. kullubhothunodda gudi maataadina
Meaning:  Never give away personal secrets to a man who is jealous. He is bound to spread these secrets to the whole town. One should always give careful thought to what should be spoken and to whom.
Envy=jealousy
Moral:  Never reveal personal secrets to an envious man.
118. cheppulona raaiee, chevilona joreega
Meaning: Quarrelling and squabbling in a home is troublesome,  very like a stone in a shoe, a bee in the ear, a particle in eye, and a thorn in the leg. These cause much pain and suffering. Care has always to be taken to have a happy home.
Squabbling = ???????
Moral: It is wise to never have quarrels in a home for it to remain a truly happy home.
119. thallidhandrulandhu dhayaleni puthrundu
Meaning:  A son who does not take care of his parents in their old age is of no use. It makes no difference whether he is alive or dead. Termites are born in mounds of earth and die. No one is ever aware of them. A son who fails in his duty is like these termites. 
Moral: One should love and care for his parents. One who does not do so lives a wasted life.
120. paalapitta sakunaphalamichhunandhuru
Meaning:  It is considered a good omen to see a blue jay (a bird). People believe it brings them luck.  Each one’s luck is his own and the bird does not know anything about what people believe in. Those who are unable to understand certain happenings beyond their comprehension believe in these superstitions.
Moral:  One  should  always depend on one’s own ability and not in omens of luck or ill-luck.
121. raamanaama japamuchhe munnu vaalmeeki
Meaning: The poet Valmiki was a tribal hunter. He was able to compose the great epic of the Ramayana, and with the chanting of the sacred name of Rama, he was transformed into a great sage. It is character which is far more relevant than caste. This is proved in his case.
Moral: Character is far more important than caste.
Nuthajala purithambulagu nuthulu nur’etikante
Meaning: It is always better to dig  one communal well instead of a hundred ordinary wells. It is better to perform one “Yagya” with sacrificial offering instead of digging a hundred communal wells. It is better to have one noble and a virtuous son than performing a hundred yagyas. One single statement of truth is even better than having a hundred noble sons. 
Communal well = a large well with steps leading to the water used by the whole                     community.
Moral: A single statement of truth surpasses all good actions, prayers and even having a hundred noble sons.
Surpass =overtake
123. aunatachu nokkadaadina maataku
Meaning: It takes but a moment to say ‘no’ to what someone else says ‘yes’. To prove that statement is right or wrong the lord Brahma himself has to come down to earth. From this it is understood how difficult it is to prove that something is true or otherwise.
Moral: Never give up the attempt to prove the truth, however difficult it may be to do so.
124. aathmashuddileni yaachaara madhi yela?
Meaning: It is of no use if rituals and traditions are observed without sincerity. It is harmful to health if food is cooked in an unclean utensil. Prayers to the Lord Shiva are wasted if they are done with an impure heart. A pure heart is divine. So all human beings should take care to keep their mind and heart pure.
Moral: Faith in God has to come from a pure heart and mind.
125. uppukappurambu nokka polikanundu
Meaning:  Salt and camphor look alike. When examined closely, their tastes differ. In the same manner, good, pious people are different from others. It is very difficult to recognize who is good and who is not, by their outward appearances.
Moral: Pious people have to be identified and they should be the role models to all.
126. badhujanulajoodu, bhaadhalasamayaana
Meaning:  A true relative is one who comes to help, when one is in trouble. A true servant is one who stays with one, in times of fear or trouble. He supports and serves in both bad times and good times. A truly good wife is one who supports and loves her husband even when his wealth is gone and finds life very difficult to bear.
Moral: Only when one is deep in trouble, does a man realizes who his true well wishers are?
127. inumu virigeneni emmaru mummaru
Meaning:  If an iron article is broken, the blacksmith heats it and mends it after two or three attempts. But if a heart breaks it is impossible to mend it. So, one has to be careful not to do things which can hurt or harm others.
Mend= ????????,?????????????
Moral: Move carefully with others, never hurting them, as a broken heart can never mend.
128. tappulennuvaaru thadopatandammu
Meaning: There  are many people in the world who can find fault with others. There is no man without a flaw. Those who criticize are unaware of their own shortcomings. Hence it is not wise to find fault with others.
Moral: One should first know one’s own faults before pointing a finger at others.
129. Neelaaloni mosali, nigidi yenugubattu
Meaning: A crocodile can attack an elephant easily when it is in water. The same crocodile can be easily overcome by a dog when it is on land. The strength of a crocodile is effective only in its natural home ground that is water. Man has to learn that his greatest advantage in a situation is, when he fights from his familiar home ground.
Moral: One’s strength is far greater on one’s own home ground. A person should be careful outside his familiar surroundings. His weakness lies is his being an outsider.
130. venna chetabatti vivarambu theliyaka
Meaning: When butter melts, it becomes ghee. When one is ignorant of that fact, even when he has butter with him, he searches for ghee. Similarly, man himself being divine, it is only sheer ignorance that he searches for God elsewhere. 
Moral: Eyes can see the whole world. But they cannot see themselves. A man is unable to see the divinity within himself. There is God in every human being.

131. dharmang-a purushulu
Meaning:  Learned men who are well-versed in the rules of righteous living, will not consider any act as just and good, if it causes the slightest harm or pain to anyone. What is considered as right and good has to offer justice to all.
Moral: True justice causes no harm to anyone and is fair and equal to all.
132. meedi pandu jooda melimie yundunu 
Meaning:  The fruit of the fig tree has a beautiful bloom on the outer side. When the fruit is opened it is full of worms. A coward appears brave outwardly. But in his heart he may be shivering with fright. One has to deal with them with care.
Moral: All that shines is not gold. Never get carried away by outward glow and appearances.
133. Adharamu kadaliyu gadalaka
Meaning: Common people approach a powerful official and go to him with their complaints and requests. If  he remains deaf  to what they say, and remains silent, he is full of arrogance and pride. He should be regarded as a sinner. Such people should never be entrusted with power.
Moral: A man, who is blinded with his power and pride, can neither see nor hear. 
134. appichuvaadu, viedhyudu
Meaning:  People should choose to reside in a town which has a pawnbroker from whom one can borrow money, a doctor who can treat in case of ill-health, and a priest who can conduct religious rites. Never stay in a place which does not offer these facilities.
Moral: A place is worth living in only it offers safeguards for health in dire necessity.
Dire= ???? ???????
135. upakaariki nupakaaramu
Meaning:  There is nothing strange about a person helping in return, his benefactor. What is unusual is, a person helping a man who has done him harm. It is  wise  to help a person who has harmed him earlier so that he may repent. He is sure to draw closer  with no enmity in his heart.
Benefactor = one who does good
Repent = feel sorry for having done something wrong ;    enmity= Hostility 
Moral: Conquer enmity with love.
137. eppati keyaadhi prasthuta
Meaning:  One who is able to speak pleasantly and tactfully at any given time to suit the situation, and does not cause hurt to himself or others is always able to avoid unpleasantness. He is a truly blessed man.
Moral: Practice speaking correctly and tactfully.
137. eppudu sampada galigina
Meaning:  Frogs crowd in large numbers to a full lake. Similarly, when it is known that someone has acquired wealth, relatives rush to his house even without invitation. Hence one should identify relatives who are true well wishers and those who are not. 
Moral: Everyone claims to be connected to a wealthy man.
138. kanakapu shimhasanamuna
Meaning:  If a dog is crowned, made to sit on the throne and  given the power to rule, can it forget its earlier habits natural to a dog? Thus a person, who does not deserve the honour, should never be placed in a position of power.
Moral: An undeserving person should never be given power.
139. kulakaanthoda neppudu
Meaning:  One should never quarrel with one’s lawfully wedded wife. She should never be blamed with false accusations. The woman should never have occasion to shed tears. If that happens, that home can never be prosperous.
 Moral: Where a woman is unhappy there is no prosperity.
140. kurimi gala dinamulalo
Meaning:  In friendship, both the friends are not aware of each other’s short comings. When their friendship breaks up, they become aware of only each other’s flaws. This is a universal truth. Thus there should be no place for hostility and all should learn to live as friends. 
Hostility=enmity, ??, ??????
Moral: When the stream has plenty of water, no stones or ditches are visible. When the stream dries up, only the rocks and pits are visible.
141. thanavaaru lenichotunu
Meaning:  A wise man will never live in a place where he has no close friends or relatives, where he is unable to interact freely, where there is unrest and disturbance often and where people do not trust  him. This is a  fact. When one continues to live in such a place, he cannot have safety and security.
Moral: Never stay at an unsafe,friendless place.


142. puthrothsahamu thandriki
Meaning:  A father should be proud and happy,  not when a son is born. He should be so when everyone showers praise on his son. It is the duty of every son to make his father proud of him. Only then can he be called a true son who has fulfilled his duty.
Moral: A son should grow up to be a worthy son of whom the parents are proud of.
143. sirigalavaani keyyedalajesina meladi
Meaning: There is not much use in helping a wealthy man. Even if that help is not given he can take care of himself. If help is given to a poor man, he is happy as he accepts it with gratitude. What is the use of rain when the cloud rains on the ocean? If the same rain falls on dry land, crops will grow and it will help the farmers. Keeping this in mind, one should offer help to one who really needs it.
Moral: Help only the needy.
144. sugunavanthuraalu
Meaning: If a man has a virtuous wife and good sons, he has truly found heaven. Every man has to wish for such a heaven.
Moral: True heaven is found in a happy family.
145. punyamantagudi, purushudie
Meaning: No man is born because of merit, or a woman, of sin. Then why should there be any discrimination between them when they both have been born of the same creation?
Moral: Flesh, blood and soul remain the same whether it is a man or a woman.
146. mrokkinanta cheraku chakeera kaabhodhu
Meaning: Praying to sugarcane will not give sugar. The cane has to be fed into a machine and the juice has to be extracted. Money cannot be earned without working hard for it. Hence only hard work will earn wealth.
Moral: Only hard work  gives rewards.
147. eedhi endhukanna vaadame thalliyiee
Meaning: Science and knowledge have progressed only because of the questions ‘what’ and ‘why’ have often been asked. There can be no progress without curiosity and questioning. So all should learn to ask questions.
Moral: Only questioning helps man to progress.
148. mandutendalona maaduchunnavani
Meaning:  No shade will come to you and protect you. You will have to go searching for shade if you want to protect  yourself  from the scorching sun. If you need help you have to seek it with your own effort.
Moral: Help does not come to your aid when you need it. You have to find the sources of help yourself.
149. matti pisuku konuta maryaada gaadanu
Meaning: Anyone who feels that the work of a farmer, who works  with clay, is demeaning work, does not know the value of mud and clay. Man has a very short span of life. The earth remains forever. It is deathless. Realizing this truth, a human being must have immense respect for mother earth.
Demeaning=low
Moral: The earth gives birth to man. Man cannot create earth so he has to learn to treat it with respect.


150. chemata kampugottu sentu vaasana gottu
Meaning: Sweat gives a bad smell. But sweat of hard labour also gives golden harvests. Perfumes give out a pleasant fragrance which disappears after a little while. One has to decide which of them has greater value and which merits greater respect.
Moral: An industrious worker always commands great respect for the wealth he creates.
151. neeramu tapthalohamuna nilchi
Meaning:  Water evaporates on a hot pan. It glows like a pearl when it rests on a lotus leaf. It turns into a real pearl in an oyster. Every man’s fortune is shaped by the company, support and environment he finds himself in.
Moral: One’s future is determined by the environment he has.
152. sampadalugalgutari mahaajanula hrudaya
Meaning: When a good man prospers, his heart is gentle and beautiful like a lily that has just bloomed. He is kind and generous. When misfortune overtakes him, his heart is like a huge rock on the mountain side, brave, hard and unyielding. 
Unyielding= immovable ; Adversity=misfortune
Moral: Generosity in prosperity and courage in adversity are the qualities of great men.

153. uurubalaadyudiena udyogi varudiena
Meaning:  However mighty a man may be, however high a position he may hold, he can be successful only if he has money power to be able help others. What can empty hands measure?
Moral: There is nothing impossible for a man with enough money power. 
154. cheemalu pettinaputtalu
Meaning:  Ants build their ant hills with great effort. Snakes occupy them and make their home. Similarly if a man without much wisdom were to hoard money, it is bound to find its way into the hands of the rulers.
Hoard = save, gather, store 
Moral: It is not enough to hoard money. It is important to know how to put it to the best use.
155. oorpuleni bhaarya yunna phalambhemi
Meaning:  A man cannot be happy with a wife who has no patience. A bad son is of no use to him. Education without good character does no good to the world. It is very important that every child has to be trained in good conduct from a very tender age. Then there will be peace and happiness in the world. If a young sapling cannot be bent and trained, is it possible to bend a full grown tree?
Moral: Education needs to build good character. It helps to keep the world a happy place live in.
156. kaanivaani cheta kaasu veesamulunchi
Meaning:  Only a fool will chase a man who is untrustworthy and has no ethics, to recover the money he has entrusted to him. Can a chicken gobbled up by a cat be called back to life? Only after a person’s character has been tested should one entrust any responsibility to him.
Gobbled = eat hastily without proper chewing  
Moral: Never entrust any responsibility to someone till they have been tried and tested, and are proved trustworthy. 
157. kaanivaani thoda kalasi melaguvaadu
Meaning:  A person found is in the company of evil men, is bound to be judged as an evil man  by others. Toddy is collected from Palmyra trees. If one were to drink milk standing under that tree, people are bound to believe it is not milk but toddy. Hence one should always be seen in good company.
Moral: If one were to choose bad company, the world will judge him as a bad man too.
158. kotibatti dhechi kotha puttamu gatti
Meaning:  A monkey may be dressed up as a leader and baboons may worship it. Those who gather around persons without good character would appear the same as the baboons. The whole show would seem absurd and purposeless.
Moral: The company of noble people is rewarding.
159. gorrelu padhivelu kudiyundina chota
Meaning: A lamb recognizes its mother in a flock of ten thousand sheep. A devotee will be able to recognize his teacher and guide in the same way. His natural power of love and sharp intelligence will help him to find the great wise teacher to guide him.
Moral: A good pious man will be able to recognize his venerable master without any difficulty. 
Venerable = to be respected 
160. chikkiyunna vela shimhambunienanu
Meaning: When a lion is weak and helpless, even a lean sick dog may trouble it. Thus, when one is weak and has no power, there should be no attempt to oppose anyone. Always weigh with wisdom, the power and strength of the opponent before taking the next step.
Moral: Without enough power there is no use opposing anyone.
161. tanuvulasthiramani dhanamulasthiramani
Meaning:  It is easy to tell others that a body’s existence is temporary in nature and wealth never stays too long at the same place. It is very difficult for the very same person who preaches, to understand the meaning of what he preaches to others. That is why wise men have always said that it is easy to preach but difficult to practise. Thus people should preach what can be practised by themselves and not ask others to practise what they themselves do not follow.
Moral: No one should preach to others what they themselves do not practise.  
162. thaamasinchi cheya dagadhetti kaaryambu
Meaning:  Never try to carry out any work in haste and anger. It can have very dangerous consequences and will not have good results. Will a raw fruit ever ripen if it has dropped on to the ground before it is ripe?
Moral: Never try to take on any work in haste without prior thought.
163. kallukundakenni ghanabhushanamu lidda
Meaning:  If an evil man is given a position of power and respect with the hope that he will become a good man, he will soon show his innate bad qualities, which he had shown earlier, and will do a great deal of harm. A toddy pot will give out the stench of what it had been used for earlier. Even if it is beautifully decorated, the foul smell continues to linger on.
Innate = inborn, natural
Moral: An evil man, if given respect, position and power, will go back to his evil ways and cause harm sooner or later.
164. kasavu tinunu gaadhe pasarambu leppudu
Meaning:  Animals that eat grass can be trained to obey man and he can get his work done. A man who eats good food does not do the same. Animals cannot think for themselves. Hence they obey man. Man, who can reason for himself and think behaves as he chooses and no one can predict his actions. Thus an animal which eats only grass can be disciplined to obey, while man who eats far better food, does not know how to impose a sense of discipline on himself. 
Predict=foretell
Moral: An animal that feeds on grass obeys orders, while man who eats for better food does not.
165. gaademenumeeda gandambu pusina
Meaning: The donkey which rolls in ash will do it again even after perfume is applied to it. Though an uncultured man is made to dress well,  he  will not behave in a cultured manner, and  will not change his behavior at all. Never offer anything to anyone without making sure that they deserve it.
Moral: Trying to make a rough man cultured is like pouring perfume in ash.
166. tannujuchi yorulu tagamechavalenani
Meaning: A person who borrows ornaments, wears them, and  hopes to win the admiration of others, is very stupid. When no one notices him, he admires himself. This is because of a complex that he has, of  being inferior to others. One should never be encouraged to behave like this.
Moral: Borrowed things are harmful heavy weights, which can bring great trouble.
167. talli yunna yapude tanaku gaaraabamu
Meaning: This is a verse that describes the worth of a mother. A mother loves, pampers and takes the utmost care of a child. No one else cares so much after a mother is gone. Hence everyone should know the value of a mother.
Moral : No one cares and loves a person more than his mother.
168. velayaga naswamedam
Meaning:  If the benefits of a hundred  ‘Aswamedha yagyas’ were to be weighed against a statement of truth, the balance would undoubtedly swing in favour of truth! 

Moral:  Truth has greater power than all prayers and rituals.
169. neellamunuganela? nidhulabettaganela
Meaning:  What is the use of having ritual baths in holy rivers, or making offerings to the gods or praying to them when one’s  heart is impure? Anything that is done with a pure heart alone will bring in rewards.
Moral: The impurity in one’s heart cannot be washed away easily.
170. raatimommakela rangiena valuvalu?
	Meaning:  Why are stone idols of gods dressed up in colourful  splendid clothes? Why are temples and towers built? Why are delicious offerings of food made to them? Has the lord ever asked for any of these?
Moral: It is foolish to believe that the Lord can be appeased with bribes and offerings.
171. uppuleni kuura yeppadhu ruchulaku
Meaning: Food without salt is tasteless. Food without cereal is not satisfying. The truly rich man is the man who does not owe anybody anything. He is a man who can survive in life without depending on anyone.
Owe = ???? ????????
Moral: No one should ever try to live on borrowed money.
172. anuvugaanichota nadhikuala manaraadu
Meaning:  When circumstances are not favorable, one should lie low and not project himself. A mountain looks small in a mirror. In no way does it mean that the mountain has lost its might. 
Moral: Victory is certain if one keeps a low profile at times. Rushing in haste to project oneself could prove to be harmful.
173. miela koka thoda maasina thala thoda
Meaning:  This stanza stresses the importance of cleanliness. However high-born a person may be, if he is dressed in soiled clothes, his hair is unkempt and his body unwashed no one would pay any attention to him. Hence, personal cleanliness and decent clothes are important for everyone to make a good impression.
Unkempt = untidy, ??? ???????? ????
Moral: A well-dressed person, who looks neat and clean, is bound to command respect.
174. ehamu viduva phalamu limpuga gavanani
Meaning:  People who convince others that happiness can be found not on this earth but only in heaven, are not speaking the truth. One has to learn to find the joy of heaven on earth itself.
Moral: Earth and heaven are like the banks of a river on either side.
175. vampukarragaachi vampu theerchagavachu
Meaning:  A crooked stick can be bent and shaped over a fire. It can be fashioned into the required shape. It may be possible perhaps to found mountains flat, but it is impossible to melt the heart of a cruel man.
Moral: It is not easy to soften the heart of a cruel man.
176. aalivanka vaara laathamabandhuvulieri
Meaning: The relatives from the wife’s side, who  come later into one’s life, become very close. The relatives from the mother’s side hardly matter though a mother is the  closest  and has  brings one up from  childhood. The relatives on the fathers’ side become very hostile, though the father  lovingly guides one in life. The reason often lies in property disputes. One has to be careful to avoid such situations. The principle on which the world moves is like that of horns that come much later in life are sharper, than the ear that one is born with.
Moral: Relationships are delicate and fragile. One should deal with them tactfully.
Fragile= easily breakable ; Tact= careful thought
177. akkaraku raani chuttamu
Meaning:   The kin who do not stand by one, in times of trouble, the god who does not grant the wishes to whom one prays earnestly, and a horse that does not run fast enough on  the battle field are better discarded. Wise elders have often given this advice and it is worth following.
Kin= relation ; Earnest=sincere; Discard=leave
Moral: Anything that is not useful when needed should be discarded
Appugoni cheyuvebhavamu
Meaning:  Living  off  borrowed money, having a young wife in old age, depending on the efficiency of a fool and living in a country where the king does not differentiate between the just and the unjust, are dangerous and one should keep a distance from these situations as they can cause trouble later.
Moral: A person should be wise enough to judge a situation and act accordingly.
179. kamalamulu neetabaasina
Meaning:  Water lilies bloom in water only when sunlight is on them. The same flowers wilt and die when they are taken out of water and the hot sun shines on them. To anyone who moves away from their natural place in life, they find even friends turn into enemies. All should wisely remain in the place life has allotted to them.
Moral: A flower blooms only when it is on the tree. If the flower is plucked away from the tree, it fades and dies.
Wilt = fade
180. tanayure tapasitapamunu
Meaning:  A person usually hesitates to talk about the achievements of a man of his town, the excellence of his son’s education, the beauty of his wife and the benefits of the plants in his garden. It is because it would sound like boasting. Boasting is certainly not the quality of a modest, cultured man.
Moral: Never boast of what is one’s own.
181. tana kalimi, endhrabhogamu
Meaning:  A vain, arrogant man truly imagines that his home is a divine palace, his poverty is the misery of the whole world, and his death would herald the end of the world. He believes that the woman he loves is as beautiful as the divine nymphs in heaven. When his vanity and arrogance come down everything changes. It is never wise to be proud and arrogant and live in a world of illusion.
Nymphs= ??????
Moral: An arrogant man is under the illusion that all the good things in life have been created for him alone.
Illusion = deceptive appearance 
182. vidalimpa nuruku, singapu
Meaning:  A lion cub will not hesitate to attack an elephant, without any fear. This is a natural instinctive action of a brave mighty creature. Heroic, valiant acts have nothing to do with age.
Moral: Courage and age have nothing to do with one another.
183. kshhamakavachambu kroda
Meaning:  Patience is like an armour that protects. Anger is an enemy that destroys. A rival to inheritance is like a spark of fire. A friend is like a balm. Evil men are like snakes. Good education is a treasure in hand. Modesty is an ornament. Good poetry is like a kingdom. One who possesses these  does not need any other protective shields.
Moral: Virtues give a good man full protection. He does not need any other armour. 
184. raakomarul rasgn-uni
Meaning:  In a royal court, kings patronize, only scholars and people with merit. They do not allow ignorant foolish people to come close to be favoured. One may wish to keep a parrot in a cage to enjoy its delightful chatter. No one would wish to have a crow for a pet.
Moral: One would like to keep gold at home but not rubbish.
185. daanamu bhogamu naasamu
Meaning:-  The three ways money can be used are to give it away in charity, enjoy it or lose it. One who does not give it away in charity or enjoy it is bound to lose it.
Moral: Money is meant to be either enjoyed or given away in charity. 
186. Chelimiyu pagayunu, theliviyu
Meaning:  The manner of speech can determine the way to promote a good bond of friendship or cause enmity, promote amicable co-operation or raise a dispute, can give a fair solution, wound  feelings, or show good conduct or bad behavior. All will have to adopt a pleasing way of speaking to keep everyone happy. 
Moral: If one has pleasant speech, all the people in the world are good to him as he is liked by all.



