8.??????????
66. iechuvaani yodha neeyani vaadunna
Meaning: If a miser is close to  a generous man, he will not allow him to give anything in charity to anyone. The mythical tree of paradise is the ‘kalpavriksha’ which is capable of granting anything that one desires.  A miser is like the thorny bush, under the kalpavriksha, which prevents all from the benefits it grants. 

Moral: One is wise to keep away from miserly men. 

67. dhaanambu seeyaka
Meaning:  A miser, who does not spend on himself, or others keeps his wealth untouched. He does not realize that one day that wealth will find its way into another’s hands, like honey that is collected so diligently by the bees is enjoyed by someone else. 
Diligently= ????????
Moral: A miser’s wealth is never used by him and is used by others after him. Wealth is meant to be spent well for good actions.

68. kalimigalgunaadu, kaanadu madamuna
Meaning:  A rich man has no heart to spend when he is prosperous and wealthy as his riches blind him with arrogance. He does not share his wealth with anyone. A man in poverty cannot be generous because he does not have the ability to do so. It is strange that people cannot spend for charitable acts, when they are well off and when in poverty they have nothing to spend. Either riches or poverty are with man all the time.  
Moral:  A man should be generous when he has money. 
69. dhanamuleemi yanuta dhaavaanalambagu
Meaning:  Poverty is like a fire. It consumes not only the poor man but all those around  him. It is wrong to even dwell on the thought of poverty. It is nothing short of a nightmare.
Nightmare = frightening dream, ???????????; Dwell=????????????
Moral: Poverty is very frightening. It should never happen to anyone. 

70.kalanaati dhanamu lakkara
Meaning:  Its does not seem possible to keep aside any amount of wealth for a future rainy day. A man may find that on a day he really needs money he may have none, even though he had been wealthy in the past. The poet asks whether it is possible to store the moonlight of a full moon for the dark night of the new moon. 
Moral: Wealth in hand today may not be there for the hour of need, tomorrow.

71. ienarunaku vithamugala
Meaning:  Whoever has a great deal of wealth in his possession he is accepted by the world as being born of noble blood. He is also described as a great man, a very intelligent man, a capable man and as one who is a truly blessed man. The world showers praise on him. The world seems to presume that all virtues are found in wealth alone.
Presume = take for granted
Moral:  Only a man of wealth is highly respected by all.  Hence it is necessary to earn wealth.
72. aakalini minchi bhujienchunattivaada
Meaning: A man who eats beyond satisfying his hunger has to suffer with indigestion. One who earns more than is necessary has to suffer with the problems that arise from his family and society, who wish to take away that money from him. 
Moral: Eat more and suffer indigestion. Earn more wealth and suffer in trying to protect it.

73. puthadigalavaani pundu
Meaning:  A sore troubling a rich man, becomes big news, that spreads far and wide, while a wedding in a poor man’s home goes totally unnoticed. 
Sore = ?????
Moral: Even a minor event in a rich man’s house is big news. 

